# About Your Students

Every one of your classes will have its own socio-cultural makeup just as it develops its own dynamics, chemistry, and personality, but you may benefit from some broad representations of your students prior to meeting them.  On the one hand, Queens College draws students from across the country as well as the world.  On the other hand, about ninety percent of the undergraduate population comes from New York City or its surrounding areas (Long Island and downstate New York).  As a consequence, English 110 classes often simultaneously bring together students with diverse backgrounds, students for whom English is a second (or third) language and students from small or underfunded high schools as well as a suburban middle-class culture.   

Of the many literacies students bring to this campus, two deserve mention here.  Recent research conducted by the college show that over half comes from a home where English is spoken as a second language.  This figure can be misleading, since in many cases it describes students who are thoroughly, and often powerfully, bilingual.  But in some cases, students for whom English is a second language enter college needing plenty of attention to their writing.  Such students cannot be identified by name or appearance, of course; instead, their background manifests itself in culturally-derived styles of argumentation, in syntactic choices marked as unconventional, and the like. We think it’s important that instructors respond positively and helpfully to these students’ writing.

Increasingly, students entering the university demonstrate literacy in electronic technologies associated with writing.  Specifically, anecdotal evidence suggests that many (but not all) first-year students have some experience in sending and receiving e-mail, in using computers, and in using the Internet for research purposes.  Some students may know much more about electronic technologies than their instructors; at the other end of the spectrum, you may encounter students who find such technologies daunting.  It makes sense, therefore, to check with your students before assuming that all of them are knowledgeable about and comfortable with electronic writing technologies. We take it as part of our job to help students practice professional communication through e-mail, knowing that their future professors and employers will expect that of them.

110 classes in FYI communities will be comprised almost entirely of first-year students who must meet the college’s College Writing I requirement while unlinked 110 classes are almost entirely non-freshmen. Students enter English 110 with a host of attitudes about writing (ranging from pleasurable anticipation to paralyzing dread) and about themselves as writers (ranging from pride to shame).  Most students will have had solid training in some modes of writing—especially descriptive prose, personal narratives, informational reports, and responses to literature; most students have demonstrated the ability to organize an essay, form coherent paragraphs, and write clearly communicative sentences.  For all their ability and training, however, relatively few students entering our classes have learned to think of writing as a broad panoply of skills, or discovered that they have both strengths and weaknesses across this spectrum of skills.  Nor will many of your students have substantial experience in critical reading, detailed analysis, or scholarly research.  In short, they need the skills our English 110 courses teach.

As a rule of thumb, students will rise to the level of expectations you set, but they may struggle initially, as all writers do when they first encounter new audiences and new demands on their writing.  You and your students will thrive as you respect their abilities, emphasize their successes, and overlook some of their failures.  Your role is not that of a controller so much as a facilitator; in our classrooms, we suggest, guide, and challenge, rather than prescribe, constrain, and thwart.

All freshmen take English 110 in their first semester, unless their performance on the CUNY/ACT basic skills tests in reading and writing warrants placement in English as a Second Language (ESL) or College English as a Second Language (CESL). These courses are designed to meet the English language needs of students with limited proficiency in English. Students take one or more semesters of these courses and must then demonstrate appropriate readiness for advancement before they register for English 110. The Academic Support Center, located in Kiely Hall 227 and directed by Dr. Howard Kleinmann, administers these courses, as well as other programs in academic skills development. The office coordinates the Writing Center (Kiely Hall 229), and the Academic Support Lab (Kiely Hall 131), which provide tutoring and other support services in writing, reading, and a variety of academic courses.  These services are available to all students at the college. English 95 exists to help non-native students of English who choose to enroll in an additional semester of writing instruction to prepare them for 110.

