# Academic Integrity

Violations of academic integrity produce anxiety on the part of teachers and students alike.  For teachers, this anxiety may arise from trying to lump different practices and intentions into one ambiguous term.  To begin sorting out some of these practices, we'd like to suggest a distinction between cheating and unfamiliarity with the conventions used to produce documented academic texts.  Students who download papers from the Internet or copy them from previous students are clearly cheating.  On the other hand, students are not always being dishonest when they incorrectly document sources or represent the knowledge of other people.  As teachers, it is our job to teach the conventions of representing knowledge in the university. With that in mind, we devote significant class time to discussions of “academic integrity,” which includes not only proper citation, but solid argumentation with the use of evidence.

However, conventions of documentation are not the same for all disciplines, as is made clear by the concept of common knowledge.  As Margaret Price says, "Common knowledge in the neuorobiology biology department of my university is different from common knowledge in the English department."1  When writing, we must have specific knowledge of our audience and their expectations for citation, as well as their understanding of what the facts are in the context in which we are writing.  When we communicate to students that they need to ask questions such as: "what audience am I writing for?  What assumptions, what bases for knowledge, do I think this community shares?  If I were to publish this essay, in what kind of publications would it appear?"2 we help demystify academic conventions and put the focus back on the rhetorical situation rather than the honesty/dishonesty binary of plagiarism.

Since most of our students come to class unfamiliar with not only the kinds of writing done at colleges and universities, but also why that writing is done, it's best to start with discussion of these practices when talking about academic conventions.  Many teachers have created assignments that ask their students to talk with professors in their discipline (or in a discipline of their choice if they have no major) about the kinds of writing they do and why they do it.  Having students report back to the class about what they found gives the class a sense of the diversity of writing taking place at the university.  (This activity can serve as a useful introduction to the research assignment.)

First-year students frequently do not recognize the distinction between their own work and someone else's. Remembering this will help you avoid taking it personally.  It is our job to teach them to understand and establish this distinction appropriately in their academic papers, not to punish them for not knowing a skill they have not yet been taught.  It takes time to discover the expectations and assumptions of an unfamiliar audience; it takes more time to internalize this information and mobilize it in one's writing.  Focusing on techniques for teaching ways to address the rhetorical situation should help to alleviate much of the anxiety felt by both teachers and students when addressing plagiarism. 

For more information and resources, see [CUNY's plagiarism resources for faculty](http://writingatqueens.org/for-faculty/plagiarism-resources/).
