# Behaviors

In most instructors’ experience, students are in fact quite forgiving about honest and isolated mistakes.  Many of us have found that on those occasions when we’ve committed an error in judgment, students have respected forthright admission of our mistake (though none of us has wanted to test this response too often).  Larger lapses in professionalism, however, interfere with a student’s right to learn, and they will almost certainly alienate a class. Failure to meet class, keep office hours, keep appointments, or prepare for class; displays of anger directed at students, or attempts to humiliate them for their lack of knowledge; failure to maintain a decorum suitable to a college class, or allowing a student or group of students to disrupt others’ attempts to learn; overt favoritism; and failure to return papers in a reasonable period of time with useful comments head this list of behaviors.  Most of us find that as we respect students’ desire to learn and succeed, they respect our desire to teach well.

Many of us have also noticed that students show increasing signs of stress six weeks or so into the semester, especially in the fall.  Our classes cause only a part of their stress, but it may be helpful to remember, as you return a batch of papers including several low grades, that some students may be receiving a C for the first time in any class.  Students may find it very helpful to know that you genuinely expect their writing and their grades to improve as they become more familiar with the new skills you’re teaching.
