# A Checklist for the First Week of Class

Before the first day of class:

1. Prepare a syllabus.  The syllabus should tell students the approximate due dates of the formal writing assignments (including graded elements of the research project) as well as conference dates when class will be canceled.  The first weeks of work leading to the first major writing assignment should be spelled out in detail, so that students can schedule time for the reading and writing work you expect them to do.
2. Once you have your teaching assignment, you might want to visit the room(s) in which you will teach if you’re in town.  Get a feel for the room: you may find it reassuring to picture the room, checking whether there is space for you to walk around, if there is ample blackboard space, and whether there is a pull-down screen for powerpoint presentations (and where the electrical outlet is located). 
3. Print your roster from CUNYFirst (information on accessing CUNYFirst can be found in Appendix I: Computing on Campus). If you have time, practice saying the names aloud.  A word of caution is in order here: Students may add and drop classes for three weeks after classes begin.  The roster you start with is not likely to be your final.  This is especially common during the spring semester.  Therefore, you will want to be on the alert for new students at the beginning of each class.  Some of these may not be enrolled in your section (ask them!), and may beg for an over-tally enrolling them in your class. You must refuse these requests; the 20 students you are charged with teaching demand enough of you already, and 20 students is the Queens College limit for English 110. 
4. Plan a class activity that gives students a preview of the work they’ll be doing in class. This could involve a short reading to analyze or some short writing.
5. Plan your first classes in detail.  Draft and start revising the writing assignment for the first paper.  Set clear learning goals, plan a variety of activities, and decide on the order of these activities for each day.  

A note about photocopying and filing syllabi: The English Department copy machines are swamped at the beginning of each semester.  Therefore, the sooner you complete your syllabus and policy sheets for copying, the better.  Since some students will add your class while others drop it, make a couple of extra copies. In order to make copies, you need to obtain a copy code from the English department – ask the English department main office personnel for this code. Copies of all syllabi need to on file in the English department; the Associate Chair Roger Sedarat (roger.sedarat@qc.cuny.edu) will email you just before classes start to ask for an electronic copy of your syllabi. It’s important that you respond to this request immediately. 

During the first week of classes:

1. Prepare an “icebreaker” for the first day, so students can begin to learn each other’s names and become accustomed to each other and to speaking in class.  Even experienced instructors find they have some nervousness on the first day of class, but it’s worthwhile to remember that students are often apprehensive as well.  You can deflect whatever nervousness you may feel, and help students gain a measure of comfort in your class, by devising plenty of activities encouraging active student participation. Ideally, these ice breakers will give students a preview of the kinds of activities they might do or the ideas they might explore in your class. Some ideas are: playing a name game to get all the students familiar with each other and you, discussing what college writing looks like and how it differs from the writing they did in high school (it can be very interesting to hear their perspective on the writing they did in high school, and how they feel about writing in general), assigning a short writing exercise that each student then shares by reading aloud, and having them read a few short texts and then discussing them in groups.  
2. Review your policies and forecast your syllabus on the first day of class.  Allow time for questions, encourage students to review them later, and give them the opportunity to ask further questions about your policies and syllabus on succeeding days.
3. Remind students to buy the necessary books/course packets required for your course or to gain access to Qwriting or Blackboard if you are distributing the readings electronically.  Be aware that students are often awaiting loan checks or other forms of financial aid during the first week of school and/or may delay purchasing books until their schedules are entirely set.  You might consider allowing extra time for the first reading assignment and/or putting the necessary reading on reserve in the library.
4. Distribute the first formal writing assignment no later than the third class session.  As with all writing assignments, be sure to review your expectations for this assignment in class.  Give students a chance to ask questions about the assignment, to discuss its requirements and component tasks, and maybe even to write about some aspect of the assignment.
