# Discussing Grades

Periodically, students will have questions about the grades you give them on assignments.  You shouldn’t feel threatened by such questions, since students are entitled to know what your grading standards are and how they can better meet these standards. You can ensure that you stand on a firm ground in these conversations by grading every essay fairly and sincerely, assessing the merits of the essay alone.

New teachers sometimes worry about being too harsh in their grading, so that when a student asks about a low grade, they are tempted to become either defensive or apologetic.  You can avoid this sort of emotional response by allowing yourself (and the student) some time to think things over.  If a student asks about a grade as soon as she receives the paper, defer the discussion for a day or two so that the student can read and consider your written comments in more detail.  We recommend that you make a 24-hour waiting period part of your classroom policies.  The problem may take care of itself; even if it doesn’t, your request that the student read and think about your comments helps convert discussion from grades considered as abstract standards of meaning to discussion of the writing itself.

If after a couple of days the student still doesn’t understand your evaluation of the paper, ask to review the paper again before you meet with her.  You may even show it to the directors of FYW to get a second opinion.  When the student arrives, review your criteria; you may end up merely elaborating on what you’ve written in your end comment—sometimes that’s all that’s needed.  In most cases, talk about the grade (the student’s agenda) can lead to talk about the writing (our agenda); you can simultaneously be firm about your grade and encourage the student to talk over ways to write a stronger paper next time.

Occasionally, a student may try to influence you to change the grade, not just explain it.  Be polite but firm.  You do not need to send every student away from your office satisfied, and you most certainly do not have to tolerate any aggressive behavior.  Should such a problem arise, end the conference immediately and discuss the matter with the FYW directors. 

If you feel that a student has a problem with your class that requires third-party intervention, discuss it with the directors of FYW, who may then decide to meet with the student separately to help resolve the impasse.
