# Discussion

Discussions involve students in dialogue not only with you, but also with each other and with the text or materials at hand.  Many of us find that discussions are more productive as students learn to speak to each other, rather than directing each response to the instructor with the hope of gaining approval.  Ideally, discussions provide your students with an opportunity to test their thoughts on a diverse audience, which in turn gives them feedback.  This aim is more likely to be attained if all participants respect the necessity of speaking with clarity, specificity, and respect for others.

A.  Preparation and questions

Both you and the students need to be prepared for a discussion.  Your task lies mainly in thinking of good discussion questions and being an efficient moderator.

What, then, is a good question?  Instructors quickly learn that broad questions leading to a yes or no answer are rarely productive.  In particular, we learn not to lead with our chins by asking students whether they liked an assigned reading.  A negative response casts a disheartening pall over the classroom, and a positive response is scarcely more valuable, since the class is unlikely to be able to account for its evaluation with informed detail.  Some general suggestions:

1. As you devise questions, anticipate likely student responses to them, and then think about how you can build on these responses to further the discussion. Remember that your students will consider you the authority in the room, so they will listen carefully for signs that you think they’re “right” or “wrong.” With that in mind, you might use your responses strategically to deepen their analyses­—focusing on the intellectual question at hand rather than the right/wrongness of an individual person.  At the same time, don’t hesitate to celebrate a comment that is particularly interesting or impressive to you, and to use it as a model or spur for further inquiry.
2. Think in advance about how to sequence your questions, moving from the simple to the complex, from the concrete to the abstract.  One might start discussion of a reading, for example, by asking verifiable questions about its content (Where and what is the thesis?  What is the first major line of support for this claim?), then move to questions about its rhetorical strategies (What is the effect of delaying rebuttal to the very end?  What would have been the effect of offering rebuttal at once, as the last text we read did?), then ask students to identify and test the argument’s assumptions, and conclude by asking about its implications or potential applications (if we accept the author’s argument, what should we be doing in response to X)?  Good questions sometimes fail to elicit response because they are asked too soon, before students have built up a collective understanding of a reading’s structure and purpose.

Perhaps the most challenging part of leading a discussion is getting it started; once a discussion gets rolling, it’s usually relatively easy to maintain its momentum.  It makes sense, therefore, to develop multiple points of entry into the reading to be discussed (thesis, claim/reason structure, key definitions, tone and diction, particularities of the introduction or conclusion, etc.) as you prepare a list of possible opening questions.  If students stumble on an opening question (e.g., What’s the thesis?), try backtracking to what they already know (e.g., Where do writers usually put thesis statements?) before moving to another entry question.  Phrasing questions is something of an art, and you learn it as you practice.  Short and specific questions that can be understood in a single hearing give students a better purchase on possible responses; questions that combine several concepts at once are hard to follow.  If you habitually rephrase questions in class, chances are that students will become confused and frustrated, so you may want to think about how to formulate your questions in advance.  Gordon Harvey’s “Elements of the Academic Essay” (see page 92 in Appendix IV) is a good document to hand out to students to familiarize them with the vocabulary we use in English 110 – thesis, motive, evidence, analysis, key terms, structure, tone, style – and can help with initiating discussion about a text.

3. Don’t be dismayed if, in the first weeks of the semester, student responses display a general, scanty, or distant understanding of an assigned reading, or if they respond with outright hostility to complex questions.  Few students, after all, will have had experience in reading the kinds of material we assign; few will recognize the value of taking notes as they read, or of rereading, unless we teach these practices.  Many will be inclined to skip passages they don’t immediately understand.  By featuring those passages, by inviting students to unpack complex ideas and demanding that they contend with the tough sentences, we do them a valuable service.  Don’t be afraid, then, to take the time to examine a single paragraph or passage in detail.  Time spent modeling the responses of an experienced reader while leading the class through a collaborative paraphrase of difficult material will be repaid in full later in the semester as students work through difficult sources in preparation for their research papers.

Although you may wish to rely on the reading assignments as the main source for discussion, you do not have to restrict yourself to these issues.  Campus, national, and international events may prove a good springboard for discussion.  Specific aspects of writing itself are always useful topics of discussion, and conversations in which students imagine and talk about ways to approach the current writing assignment can be extremely productive.

B.  Performance Guidelines for Instructors and Students
Teacher: As when you lecture, remind yourself to speak clearly and audibly, to vary your pace and rhythm, and to monitor student responses as you speak. Your students may be new to the rhetorical conventions that you use, and they may need help with vocabulary that seems common to you, but they are likely to be won over easily by clarity and willingness to provide explanations and rationales for class activities. 

A brief aside is warranted here: If you speak English that is accented in a way unfamiliar to New Yorkers, some of your students may express impatience at having to expend extra effort to understand you in class. The same is true if your students speak with an accent; many Queens College students are multilingual immigrants or second-generation Americans. Make it clear that English is inflected in many different ways by speakers from across the nation, not to mention the world, and that a world-class university education entails learning how to negotiate linguistic variety effectively.

Whatever your background may be, your students likely will be won over by enthusiastic, energetic leadership of discussions.  Student evaluations repeatedly show how much students appreciate their instructors’ enthusiasm.  By showing that you like what you’re doing, you model the response you seek from them; a teacher’s behavior is contagious.  If, through posture and comments, instructors communicate boredom and detachment, or show little interest in or respect for student responses, students will find little reason to participate in discussion. 

It is difficult to conduct an effective discussion while sitting behind a desk, so you will want to get up and move around the classroom.  By having your students follow you around with their eyes, you’ll help them remain alert.  Move toward your students as they speak, rather than backing away from them.  It’s important to listen to your students as they speak, and to show that you’re listening, rather than staring out a window or contemplating the blackboard.  You can safeguard against privileging any particular block of students by remembering to move around the room.  If space permits, consider walking to the back of the room on occasion—you and your students might enjoy the change in perspective. 

If your room allows for it, consider asking your students to sit in a circle for discussion.  In that way everyone can see everyone else, and no one can hide behind another person’s back.  More students are likely to contribute to discussion if arranged in a circle than when they are seated in rows.  Further, circular seating fosters direct address among students.

Try not to take what students do personally (for instance, if they deem your favorite essay or author boring or balk before a lesson plan that is brilliantly conceived), and never lose your temper during a discussion.  A sense of humor helps (but don’t try too hard to be funny); be open and accessible.  You can be flexible without being a push-over.  Don’t be too surprised if many of your students have not read the assignment the day after Thanksgiving break, or on the day when a paper assignment is due.  These can be good occasions for review of what has been accomplished, for forecast of what remains to be done, and for work on writing and revision.

The language we choose during discussions exerts a powerful influence on our students’ language and attitudes.  Sexist or any other kind of discriminatory language is prohibited by university policies; put more positively, as instructors we have the opportunity to model regard for all groups in our discourse.

Students:  Make it clear that you expect the students to listen to each other without interrupting and to engage productively with each other during class discussions.  If a student is particularly disruptive—and this is very seldom the case—talk to him or her individually.  Please remember that you do not have to put up with undisciplined behavior or any other obstacles which prevent the class and you from working comfortably.  Contact the Directors of First Year Writing for help if you need it.

Cultural dynamics of gender, race, and class will doubtless shape classroom discussion.  Studies of conversational style, for example, illustrate how gender figures in the pattern and content of turn-taking.  For example, if a student prefaces a turn with “This may sound stupid, but . . .,” this student may have no expectation of her contribution being doubted as inadequate.  Instead, she may be aiming to give needed ground to other speakers, to provide space for continued conversation.  Yet some auditors will understand such a speaker to be lacking in confidence, and will respond accordingly.  It is your job to recognize such subtle degrees of miscommunication and to intervene to keep discussion moving forward productively and humanely.  Whatever the dynamic in your classroom, try to insure that everyone has a chance to contribute and that no one feels threatened.  And be aware, of course, that student perception of your own gender, race, and social position will also affect student response.

Students understand the need to take notes during lectures, but they may need some prompting before they take notes during discussion.  Further, they may need some training in how to take notes while speaking and listening to others.  You can help them learn this skill by jotting responses on the blackboard as students speak, and occasionally making connections between these points (or, perhaps even better, asking students what connections or patterns they discern).  You can help students recognize the value of this skill by occasionally asking them, at the end of a discussion, to write a coherent paragraph-length synthesis of what was said.

C. Working with student responses and questions

Especially in the first weeks of the semester, students may be reluctant to speak up, and you may encounter a long silence in response to your first question or two.  Tempting as it is to answer the question yourself, you will help yourself and your students by waiting the silence out.  You can repeat the question, reassure them that you know they can answer the question, and offer other verbal and facial cues of encouragement—but you can also refuse to bail them out of their increasing discomfort as the seconds pass.  Once a brave soul or two volunteers a response, you can generally fan the first embers of response into a satisfactory blaze.  If two or three students dominate a discussion, you can gracefully acknowledge their contributions while bringing others into the discussion (e.g., “Vanessa and Tim and Shanika are doing all the work here, and it’s time to get other voices into the mix.  Jamie, what’s your take?”).  As you call on students by name, shy and passive students gain a point of entry.

Listen to your students’ answers without interrupting them.  When a student has finished talking, don’t simply repeat her answer, but do check with the rest of the class to make sure they have understood.  You can do this in an indirect way: “Rita, could you tell us how Tom’s point relates to Maxine Hong Kingston’s thesis?”

Acknowledge every answer you get, but don’t wildly nod in approval of everything you hear and lead the students into believing that every answer is the best one imaginable.  Neutralize the difference between excellent and adequate responses.  Show your students how to use every idea to move a conversation forward as you respond with encouragement that is also critical.  Remember what students say, and use their answers when appropriate—it is useful to make some notes after every class.  Especially at the beginning of the semester, students feel more at ease (and flattered) when you refer to their answer two or three classes later. 

As much as possible, encourage your students to ask questions.  Apart from asking “Are there any questions?” you can make your request more specific: “Does anyone have any questions about the historical context of Ladd’s?” Or, “As you read, were there any places where you felt confused or uncertain what the author meant, or why this point was relevant?”  Don’t just ask for student questions as an afterthought, or as a signal that class is over.  Make it clear that you are genuinely interested in their questions.  Students who are truly confused about an issue may not ask questions because they don’t know what questions to ask.  Try phrasing potential questions for them (“Do you think that Ladd favors a particular perspective on the Berlin Wall?  Are there dangers involved in refusing to endorse any of its significations?").  If you feel that students respond to your questions well enough but aren’t asking questions on their own, you can assign brief writing tasks (as homework, at the beginning of class, or even in the middle of a discussion) that ask them to generate questions posed by their reading and responses to the reading.

There are several ways to respond to student questions.  Where possible, you may want to help students answer the question themselves, perhaps by asking them to work through what prompted their question, or by reminding them of what they have learned earlier.  Such responses need to be couched in a friendly, non-threatening manner.  If students suspect that their questions may be turned into a cross-examination, they will stop asking them.

As an alternative, you may want to turn a student’s question over to the class or to set up a collegial debate between students who reach alternative conclusions about a text.  Doing so may help students realize that you are not the sole source of knowledge in the classroom, and may help foster a collaborative spirit of inquiry.  This response, too, requires some tact, since you don’t want students who ask questions to feel that their ignorance or lack of comprehension is on display.

Finally, you may choose to answer the question yourself.  But if you are stumped by a factual question, never fake an answer or avoid the question.  Whether you possess a bit of factual information is much less important than your ability to show students how to retrieve such information for themselves.  Depending on the complexity and context of the question, you might suggest how the student can find an answer, or look up the information yourself and report how you found it at the beginning of the next class.
