# Getting It Done: Grading Advice

There is no ideal approach to grading papers; everyone you ask will give you different tips for handling the job.  There are a number of fair and effective methods of grading: which of these you choose is less important than developing a stable and consistent approach.  Each of your students will write four revised essays and many more pages of in-class writing, response papers, blog posts, etc., during the semester, and grading these hundreds of pages requires you to be systematic.  Here are a few basic grading considerations:

1.  Set a schedule.  Some like to organize their grading by time (i.e., “I’ll grade for three hours tonight”) others by papers (i.e., “I’ll grade seven papers tonight”).  After a stack or two, you’ll get a sense of what works best for you; it’s worth thinking about. It’s crucial that you return your essays in a timely manner, both to keep to the calendar that you set and to model professionalism for your students.  Once you decide how many days you have to grade a batch of essays, you can decide how to distribute the work.
2.  Don’t put off your grading until the last possible minute.  Both you and your students suffer when you grade all papers in a last-ditch marathon.
3.  Know your criteria.  If you’ve told students you are most concerned with the specificity of their thesis statements for essay #1, then your comments and grading range should reflect that priority.  Before you start grading papers, reread your assignment and announced criteria; think about what you taught and what students practiced in the classes leading to the assignment.
4.  Read through a paper once quickly before you comment.  This will enable you to grasp the thesis and overall structure, and to spot any major problem areas before diving into the intricacies of individual sentences.
5.  Be selective.  You need not write down comments on every sentence or potential problem in an essay.  Identify and comment on recurring problems or those problems you see as most serious.
6.  Don’t spend too much time on each paper.  Try to limit yourself to no more than 20 minutes per short papers (3-5 pp.); later in your progress, you may get your time down to 10-15 minutes per short essay.  We’re not pushing you to set speed records with your grading, but we recognize that you will want to manage this time-consuming task so that you have time for your own course work.  
7.  Keep moving.  If you’ve completed your comments on a paper but can’t decide between an A- or a B+, make a note to yourself to go back to that paper later and determine the final grade.  Don’t agonize over it for half an hour. It may help to pencil in a grade on each paper, and then once you’ve finished reading the stack to go back and decide on the final grade based on how the class did as a whole.
8.  Calibrate.  After you’ve read through the entire stack and tentatively penciled in grades, go back through the stack, separating the papers by grade (i.e., make an “A” pile, a “B” pile, etc.).  Then, go through each pile and ask yourself whether all of your A papers (your B papers, etc.) seem to be of roughly the same quality.  You will find yourself making minor adjustments, shifting one paper from the “B” pile to the “C” pile and so on.
9.  Never promise to deliver graded papers on a specific day.  If you name a date, and then something unforeseen prevents you from meeting that deadline, your students will be disappointed and angry, no matter how good your excuse is.  As a rule, you should return papers to students before you require them to turn in the next paper.  Allow them time to apply the advice you’ve given them in your comments.
10.  Return papers at the end of class.  If you return them at the beginning, students will be distracted.
11.  Before returning papers, make some photocopies.  Look for drafts, peer comments, and passages from finished work that you might want to use for later activities.  Copy two or three revised papers so you have a record of how students responded to your assignment—if you use the same assignment in a later course, these samples can help future students.

