# Group Work

Teaching through small-group activities has several advantages.  The students get to know each other, they are exposed to each other’s ideas, and they learn to use analytical terms easily in conversation.  Group work resembles revision workshops in terms of planning; we can’t just walk into the classroom and expect students to form balanced little groups.  Consider the dynamics of the classroom when you divide the class into small groups (place talkative students with less voluble ones; move domineering students around).  Generally, four people to a group is plenty.  When you make groups larger than that, it becomes too difficult for students to participate evenly.

Group activities should be focused: for example, you can have students answer a number of study questions, distributing the questions among the groups so that every group comes up with, and reports on, a different set of answers.  This gives the students practice in communicating their answers to others.  Define the task as specifically as possible: “Discuss the readings by Malcolm X and Benjamin Franklin” will make for unfocused responses, since students won’t be sure exactly what you want them to consider.  You’ll get more coherent answers with something like, “Select five books that Malcolm X mentions in this section from his autobiography, and explain how these specific books contribute to his overall thesis.”  To encourage students to keep at the task at hand, put a time limit on group work; fifteen minutes is usually more than enough.  Appoint a scribe in each group, a student who is responsible for recording the group’s answers in writing.

Don’t neglect to have students write together in small groups: for instance, ask them to revise a sample paragraph for a particular audience.  Another useful group activity is collaborative research.  Have students work together to locate as much information from as many different sources as possible on a given topic.  They’ll be less intimidated by the library if they go there together and work the online catalogues as a group.

After the group work, have the students share their findings with the class.  Keep an eye on the clock to make sure every group gets its say.  If you run out of time, however, you can still collect the groups’ written statements, combine them into a handout, and use them during the next class hour.

