# Guidelines for Effective Conferencing

Because of the recitation hour, you might not want to do conferences outside of class. But in case you do, here are some guidelines:

Confer Out of Class.  If you teach one section of English 110, dismiss your class for one day (if you teach two classes, consider dismissing for two days).  You may count a missed conference as one absence.  Do not plan, however, to meet with all your students in one day (it gets exhausting!); you can probably plan on meeting with about half of your students on the cancelled class day and the rest over surrounding days.

Coordinate Your Conference Schedule.  Make sure to schedule several breaks into your conference days (e.g., one for every four or five conferences).  Not only will the break give you a chance to catch your breath (or grab a cup of coffee or something to eat), but it can also cushion your schedule if some of your conferences start to run a little long, as they often do.  Don’t schedule breaks during the time your class would normally meet, because those are slots during which you know your students will have no outside conflicts.  Prepare a conference sign-up sheet and circulate it among the students several times before the conferences.  Insist that each student record the meeting time, and make sure everyone knows where your office is (remember that just knowing a room number in the Klapper Hall does not mean students know how to find a room in it!).

Confer for Consequences.  Coordinate conferences with your syllabus.  Always schedule the meetings with a specific purpose in mind, so as not to waste the conference time just chatting with your students or attempting to discover any concerns they might have with the course.  Although building rapport with your students and getting feedback from them about the course are certainly worthy goals, the purpose of conferences should probably be a bit more substantial.  For example, you might have one conference in the first few weeks of the semester in order to go through a pre-graded assignment with the student and have a second round of conferences as the research paper is coming due.  Make sure students bring with them the rough drafts, sample sources, or other materials necessary for the conference.

Confer by the Clock.  Instructors and students alike should respect scheduled times.  To encourage students to attend their conferences, count the missed conference as equivalent to one day absent.  Better yet, set specific performance goals for the conference and grade students accordingly.  Students who miss the conference would then receive a zero for participation.

Confer with Control.  For the class-wide conferences, you might also consider setting fairly rigid parameters as to discussion topics appropriate for the meeting.  If, for instance, the purpose of the conference is to review a rough draft but a student instead comes prepared to debate a previous paper grade, for the sake of time and productivity encourage the student to schedule another appointment for that particular topic and then resume a discussion of the draft. Some students display a remarkable tenacity in arguing for higher grades or exemption from assignments.  If a student starts relying on emotional repetition rather than on logic, you have every right to ask that person to leave.  Dismiss also the purely comparative arguments; the rave response a paper may have received from the sage roommate or the elusive “other class” does not matter in the context of your course.  

Let Your Students Talk.  A conference, by definition, should encourage a two-way exchange of ideas; make the students take an active role in the process.  Whenever possible, let them do the talking and then respond to their ideas.  Resist the temptation to use the conference as a forum for delivering a private lecture to teach student (you won’t have time and you’ll probably get tired of repeating the exact same advice twenty or more times).

The conference should be a professional situation with an emphasis on rhetoric and on your class.  Rather than conduct counseling or therapy sessions, we can help students recognize appropriate services provided by the university.  We should neither solicit nor endure student opinion of our colleagues.

While conferences provide opportunities for dealing with unruly students, clarifying assignments, and addressing individual problems not shared by the whole class, you shouldn’t teach a separate 75-minute class in conference.  Remind students that they can supplement what they learn from you by going to the Writing Center; tutors there will help writers with all facets of writing.
