# Queens College and Its Mission

from the Queens College 2010-2011 Factbook, prepared by the Office of Institutional Research

Established in 1937 to offer a strong liberal arts education to working-class people, Queens College has grown to an enrollment of 20,906 students in Fall 2010, including 16,195 undergraduate and 4,711 graduate students. Of the Fall 2010 undergraduate students, 73% attended full-time and 27% part-time. Of the graduate students, 11% attend full-time and 89% part-time. While known for its strong liberal arts emphasis, Queens College also offers professional degrees on both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Students come from nearly 170 different countries and speak over 110 different languages.

Queens College is part of the City University System, which ranked high on the Forbes College Rankings list. “Forbes, which worked with the Center for College Affordability and Productivity to compile the list, indicating that it sought to determine which colleges best met students’ needs, rather than which came with the best reputation. The lists’ creators considered graduates’ success in their chosen career field; their average salaries; the schools’ retention and graduation rates; and student evaluations of their professors and classes, as well as the cost of the institution and amount of debt upon graduation.”

Queens College is listed in the Princeton Review’s The Best 373 Colleges, and as one of the “Best Public Universities-Master’s” institutions in U.S. News and World Report’s America’s Best Colleges, which includes Queens in the top tier of Regional Northeast master’s-level colleges. In addition, Queens College also is listed online under the Best Graduate Schools for Library Information Science Programs, Fine Arts Schools, Psychology Schools, and Speech Pathology Schools. In Spring 2011, the Education Trust issued a report in which Queens College was listed as one of five colleges that are doing a good job serving low-income students. [For further information, see “Priced Out: How the Wrong Financial-Aid Policies Hurt Low-Income Students” (www.edtrust.org/sites/edtrust.org/files/publications/files/PricedOutFINAL2.0_0.pdf/).]
