# Thinking About Your Syllabus

With your syllabus you give your students essential information about your course, but you also give them a model of professionalism and a reason to get excited about all that they will learn. Your syllabus should function as a document that both pushes you to plan your semester and also one that has the built-in structure and mechanism to make it an easily accessible document for your students and for yourself. Since this is the first document that students will receive in your classroom, as well as one they will be referring to at various points throughout the semester, it is important that the syllabus appears thorough, organized and accessible. Think about setting a tone in your syllabus that you would like to set in your classroom and make it a model of good writing. Avoid making empty threats or setting boundaries that you don’t plan to meet, since this will only confuse your class. Think back to examples of syllabi that worked best for you as a student. When you are able to give students a clear idea of the policies of your classroom, a document that is easily understandable, and has major dates for projects, they will gain a sense of comfort by building their own set of expectations for the writing classroom. 

Many people choose to use the course description on the syllabus or other areas of the syllabus as a space to express what kinds of behavior and interaction they expect in the classroom that will help make the semester run smoothly. You might find it helpful to talk about the interactive nature of the writing classroom, the nature of peer reviews, the need to keep up with readings and assignments, and the willingness to be prepared to participate in class discussion. If you are able to communicate the respect you have for your students and for your own classroom, you are likely to inspire this respect from them for you and for each other.

Having your syllabus ready for the first day of class allows you to feel (and appear) organized and ready for the semester. It is helpful to show the students by example that the syllabus is essentially a contract for the semester, which both you and they need to respect. Read through your policies during the class period (or have students read) and discuss different sections of the syllabus. This may be the only time your students sit down and really read these policies, so make the most of this time and reinforce the importance of the information. While you have given your students a hard copy of the document, you may want to also include a copy that can be accessed on the web if this fits your needs. In future classes, refer to course policies, being careful to discuss due dates, changed dates, and penalties that surround missing requirements for each major assignment.
