# Ten Suggestions for Writing Assignments

1.  Choose your writing assignments carefully.  Spend time selecting and formulating your assignment.  Well-developed assignments are more likely to yield fine student papers than topics thrown together hastily. Try to anticipate how students will handle a topic: they may respond in ways you hadn’t counted on.
2.  Be specific about requirements.  Always hand out your assignments in written form; specify due dates, length, format, background readings, grading criteria, and the purpose of the assignment.
3.  Integrate your assignments.  Make sure there is a relationship between in-class work and out-of-class work; encourage your students to talk about (and write about) their assignments in class.  Devote a part of class discussion to the purpose and the position of a particular assignment within the syllabus.  Provide some background information, and create a context in which your students can understand the assignment.  Allow plenty of time for questions related to the assignment.  Schedule some time to do prewriting exercises in class. 
4.  Time your assignments well.  Do not overburden the students when you are working under heavy pressure.  Don’t ask your students to hand in Essay #2 if you still haven’t returned Essay #1, graded and commented upon; they deserve to see what they did well, and not-so-well, on their last paper before they submit another one.  Try to return regular essays within one week; two weeks is reasonable for the longer research papers.  Delays in returning graded papers considerably weaken the impact of your feedback.
5.  Use varied and interesting topics.  Provide a choice of topics, or allow your students to create their own subtopics.  Find out what the interests of your students are and use their suggestions whenever practical.  Take into account that your own cultural background may not be the same as your students’; avoid unreflectively ethnocentric topics.
6.  Prevent plagiarism.  When you borrow topics, tailor them to your own purposes; never use a borrowed assignment verbatim.  Make students turn in their drafts, notes, annotated articles, and outlines with the final copy of the essay.  Original thinking for topics, combined with sufficient guidance during the writing process, should diminish the possibility of plagiarism.  Many students simply don’t recognize the difference between their own writing and someone else’s: it’s your job to teach that very important aspect of the academic writing genre.
7.  Clarify the difference between types and contexts of writing.  Explain the difference between an essay and an impromptu.  Some of your students are unaware that out-of-class essays will require more revision (and hence more time) than in-class ones, and so they think it’s perfectly normal to begin working on an essay the day (or hour) before it’s due.  You can dispel such notions by encouraging students to be as self-analytical as possible about their writing.  Encourage them to consider their own (and others’) writing processes, whether they’re working on an out-of-class essay, an in-class one, or a ten-minute exercise. 

Many students do not know how to prewrite.  They compose their papers the night before they’re due because they don’t know what else to do.  Teach the writing process: model it, discuss it, and give students a chance to practice it in class, under your supervision and with the help of their classmates.

8.  Allow for student feedback.  Informal in-class writing provides your students with a chance to express how they feel about their writing assignments, which topics they want to write about, and how they see their own writing as part of the course goals.  Some instructors ask their students to write a paragraph about the essay they’re about to turn in, assessing its merits or describing their writing process; students then submit this paragraph with the paper.
9.  Expose students to each others’ writing.  Ask your students for permission to reproduce their papers for class discussion, or simply do it anonymously (don’t restrict yourself to what you consider a “good” paper; use “mediocre” papers as well).  Turn peer editing into a constructive writing assignment.
10. Announce your office hours in your syllabus and repeat the invitation often.  Make sure your students know that they can make appointments for discussion of their work-in-progress.  Use conferences or tutorial sessions to discuss drafts of essays.
